She
being, uh, labeling the committee is scheduled
to hear from vegan society, um, about their petition
for 10 minutes, followed
by the vegetarian Society about
their petition for 10 minutes.
Aren't we blessed? Following this?
The committee will have five minutes scheduled
to discuss the next steps.
Mr. Chair. Oh, did I? Was I inferring something?
Oh, I apologize. Um, we got, I think we try
and have we started you?
Um, yeah, we, hello? Claire Horse. Yeah. Hello.
I think you, I would love, you're not on mute.
Thank you so much for your time today.
It's, um, we know that time is very precious
and people's busy lives.
We have you for 10 minutes.
Um, would you be so kind to make some introductory remarks?
Um, excuse me.
Uh, and I imagine my team will have questions for you.
Awesome. Um, yeah, essentially our petition is in line
with, um, other countries elsewhere who are starting to, uh,
enshrine the words vegan and vegetarian into the food laws.
And we're just, um, wanting the same in New Zealand,
essentially, because currently there is no actual legal
meaning of vegan
or vegetarian, which can be confusing for consumers.
It's obviously also confusing for producers
and manufacturers who may inadvertently say
that something is vegan when actually isn't,
because they don't actually know what actually is vegan.
And so we're requesting that, um, the, um,
laws be up, um, upgraded, shall we say,
to include those definitions.
Um, so that, uh, everyone is protected.
Everyone knows what is vegan,
everyone knows what is vegetarian.
Um, in our submission, we did, um, make a list
of those things that we would like to be included.
And so I assume that you have all went through those.
Yes. Thank you. Thank you.
Claire, can I lead off with a question?
Then I'm gonna go to Steve Abel. Um,
Sure.
You would be cognizant, I'm sure, of the fact
that we've got a cost of living crisis
and everything is very expensive and in a world Absolutely.
With very little money, uh, including the Crown's books.
If I might add that, you know, we've, uh, we've absorbed,
uh, and, and now added to our national debt.
I'm concerned, uh, how we screw up the, the,
the vegan society
and the aspirations to have more clarity in
and around what is and what isn't.
But then there's a, the role of the introduction
of legislation and then subsequent regulation.
Do you not see that, that the, the costs might be
unnecessarily burdensome from the crown's point of view
as a regulator, because there's
so many different food types out there, right.
And, and the, the, there's the risk that the vagaries of
what is and what isn't will have a significant cost
to the crown to sort of regulate that reality.
What do you think? I'll come to you, Joe.
Um, so Please clear and yeah, please, by all means.
Yeah. I mean, currently, uh, things,
foods are labeled vegan anyway, so, um,
I don't really feel
that there's an extra cost involved in that.
It's, we just are seeking clarity in the law about
what those words actually mean.
Vegan should mean X, Y, z, vegetarian should mean X, y, Z.
So that's, that's all that we're asking for.
Um, as I said, I don't really feel
that there would be unnecessary burden of cost
to, to anybody.
Um, but it would mean that should
in future people come across products that
say they are vegan
and then they actually contain milk powder,
that we then have recourse to say, Hey,
this has been incorrectly labeled.
Um, you know, this, something needs to be done about this.
Um, whereas currently we don't actually have that recourse.
Mm. Okay. Thank you, Claire, Steve,
and then Joe Luxton has a question.
Thank you, Steve. Lead
Off. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, um, essentially Claire, thank you
for being here today and for your, uh, petition.
There are other jurisdictions
where there's been legislatively set out
specific definitions of what is vegan
and what is vegetarian.
And you were just asking that we have that in our law so
that, uh, those customers
and members of the public who want to eat vegan
or vegetarian can be confident that there's a, you know,
publicly accredited certification that sits behind
or legislative definition that sits behind those labels.
And, uh, can you give us some examples of jurisdictions
where that has happened?
Um, I'm not sure what you mean examples? Where
Do you mean in Other countries Parts
to the world? Yeah, yeah,
Yeah. Okay.
Um, yeah, certainly in the uk they have, um,
put it into law exactly what is vegan, exactly what is,
um, vegetarian,
and it is, um, part
of their food laws there under the food safety law.
And again, also I think it should come under,
and this is why we brought it to the NPI,
because I do feel it falls under food safety laws here
in New Zealand as well.
Yeah. Because there are people who are allergic
to milk products to eggs, um, and
therefore, if they see a product that is marked vegan
and they think, oh, this is vegan,
it will not have milk in it, it will not have eggs in it.
And they don't bother to go through those tiny, tiny writing
of the ingredient list
because they've accepted that the label
that said vegan on the packaging was correct.
And then they get it home and they go through
and they say, oh, actually, okay, yes,
it is in bold contains milk,
but I didn't see that when I was buying it,
and I relied on the vegan label.
Um, and so this, this is
where we feel that there is a problem.
Um, and so the, um, the UK has, has put that into law.
Um, the EU is also working on this issue
and, um, trying to get it, um, put into, into their,
their legislation as well.
Um, and so yeah, we, we feel that it's just going
to help everybody, businesses, manufacturers, consumers,
uh, ev everyone really.
Then, um, yeah, we what swap Thank you.
Clear, clear. Steve's got a supplement on that. Yeah.
Thank you very much, Mr. So essentially,
because, um, there it's more than mely an issue of
personal choice, though most vegans,
vegetarians will be choosing for reasons
of ethics or what have you.
It's also a health issue.
So it's important that it is, it's re it's appropriate
that it's part of our food safety labeling
regulations, is what you're saying.
Yes. Would you be comfortable with us doing a cut
and paste of the UK definition of vegetarian and vegan?
Is that a definition that your
society thinks is appropriate?
Um, I believe that we based our definition on,
on theirs, so, yes.
Yeah. So it's not a lot of work for us in New Zealand.
We could just do what the UK's done. Mm-hmm.
Pretty much, yes, this is my feelings and,
and a lot of foods are indeed correctly labeled,
but there are also some which aren't, and this is, this is,
and so this is where the problem is,
and we just want to be able to say, Hey,
that's actually not correctly labeled.
Can you please readjust your packaging and, and,
and label things correctly?
Brilliant. Thank you. Thank you, Claire.
I've got a question from Hamus.
Excellent. Thank you, Claire. And thank you
for your petition.
Uh, given the example of something labeled as vegan
but containing milk powder,
would they not already be captured by the Fair Trading Act
of mislabeling food?
Uh, well, it should be. Yeah. Absolutely. It should be.
And it shouldn't be on, on sale in the first place.
So, so we actually already have legislation
that would capture that example,
But it doesn't because there have been foods, as in our,
um, evidence that we supplied with the written submission,
um, you'll see that there were a number
of products listed in there that did have, um,
non-vegan ingredients, but yet they were labeled as vegan.
So, But, but in effect,
that product has breached the law, their existing laws, no.
Um, so do, do we need more law or
Do we actually just need to enforce a law
that's already a available?
I think we need clarity within the law
because to my understanding,
there is not an actual legal definition of vegans,
and there is an actual legal definition of vegetarian.
And this is, this is the problem.
And that's why, um, things can sort of either
intentionally or unintentionally fall into
the wrong category.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you, Hamish, and thank you Claire.
Um, is there any final or further questions for Claire?
We have her for a few more minutes,
and then we'll, yeah, I need Steve. Oh, yeah.
If, if there's time. Yeah, just, um, clear it's
a presumption and it sort of extends from, uh, Mr.
Campbell's question, a presumption
that the burden fall on the, uh, consumer
to do the micro reading of all those ingredients.
Um, what would be gained
in the, you know, day-to-day practical effort of choosing
to avoid, uh, dairy products, for example,
if you're a vegan, if there was real certainty
that there was a legal definition
and that when you saw that label, you knew that it met
that legal, legal definition that would take away some
of the stress and the burden for food buyers
who were trying, who needed to avoid, uh, dairy products
for health reasons, or wanted to for other reasons.
AB absolutely. I mean,
we do have a vegan certification scheme running in
New Zealand, and, um, some manufacturers do go through
that certification scheme, right?
And, and then, um, that obviously that does cost them money.
Um, but that then is an absolute guarantee for
anybody that if that vegan certification is on that product,
that the, um, vegetarian society has indeed gone through
and made sure that those ingredients are exactly
what they say they are and
therefore does meet the vegan criteria.
Um, that's why we want to put this more
as a legal definition in law so that people don't all have
to go through that certification process.
Um, I mean, we have a number of somewhat confusing labels.
You may have seen them already yourselves,
um, vegan friendly.
Now even vegans don't really know what that means.
Vegan friendly. What does that mean?
It turns out what it means is
that they haven't intentionally put in non-vegan
ingredients, but that
that product is manufactured in a plant which manufactures
other non-graded, non-vegan, um, foods.
Um, so it, it would stop these kind of things being there.
We we'd like, we'd like it
to be just clear what is vegan friendly?
No, don't tell us it's vegan friendly. Is it vegan or not?
That's all we wanna know.
Is there something in there that is,
is going to cause harm to me?
Sorry. Sorry. No further questions.
We've got another submitter waiting. Yeah.
Thank you, Claire. Exceedingly grateful for your time.
I think your submission was wholesome
and fulsome, and we've learned a lot.
Um, certainly people like me
quite ignorant to a lot of this.
So thank you very much, um, and have a wonderful day.
Thank you. No worries.
Thank you, Claire. Ina Hala, good to see you online.
We've just been listening to Claire about issues
to do with the vegan society.
Um, we're now going to move across to you good morning, uh,
to discuss, uh, the Vegetarian society
and what you think about the difficulties
in terms of labeling.
Great. Thank you, uh, for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, my name is Ina Babich
and I'm here representing the New Zealand Vegetarian
Society, a nonprofit organization
that has been supporting vegetarians, vegans,
and those transitioning to a more ethical,
sustainable diet for over 80 years.
Um, our petition, uh, parliament, um,
the parliament introduced legislation
to ensure accurate labeling
of vegetarian beam products reflecting a growing public
demand for clarity, consistency,
and fairness in how products are labeled, um, in author all.
At present, there's no legal definition of vegetarian
or vegan and New Zealand's labeling reg uh, regulations.
This means manufacturers can use these words
or similar terms such
as plant-based without meeting any consistent standard.
As a result, consumers are being misled and ethical.
Businesses that uphold genuine standards are being undercut
by those that don't.
For example, we've seen products labeled plant-based
that still contain milk solids, confectionary marked vegan
and vegetarian, that includes gelatin
and snacks labeled suitable for vegans,
despite containing egg and, uh, milk powder.
Each of these examples was found on New Zealand shelves in
just the past three years.
So this isn't simply a matter of preference
or a lifestyle, it's a matter
of consumer rights and fair trading.
Um, when a label says vegan
or vegetarian, people should be able to trust
that information without having to study every ingredient
or contact the manufacturer to check.
Um, this is also especially important for people
with allergies, um,
or those making choices based on religious beliefs.
Um, the New Zealand Vegetarian Society is asking for clear,
standardized, and enforceable definitions of these terms.
Uh, written submission, um, which you, uh, already read,
outlines a few practical steps, uh,
standardizing the term plant-based.
So it can only be used for products
that are a hundred percent plant derived, uh,
banning vague claims such as less dairy,
which have no defined meaning, um, and then defining vegan
and vegetarian to reflect what consumers already understand,
that vegan products contain no animal ingredients
or byproducts at any stage,
and that vegetarian products exclude meat, poultry, fish,
and seafood with any animal derived additives, um,
clearly disclosed.
So these definitions, um,
also include practical safeguards such as measures
to prevent cross-contamination, the use
of GMO-free ingredients,
and ensuring that no animal testing has been carried up, so
that when a product carries these labels,
consumers can rely on them completely.
So these are straightforward common sense expectations
that already align with
how the public interprets these words.
Um, the Commerce Commission
and its written response to the committee confirmed
that the Fair Trading Act already prohibits misleading
or deceptive conduct
and allows for enforcement action where false
or unsubstantiated claims are made.
However, the act does not currently define what vegetarian
or vegan mean, leaving these terms open to interpretation
and potential misuse.
Um, introducing clear definitions within the Fair Trading
Act would make enforcement more consistent
and proactive, providing clarity
for both consumers and for businesses.
Importantly, the commission also noted that a review
of the Fair Trading Act is planned
and that this could provide an opportunity
to strengthen protections by increasing penalties
and improving deterrence against misleading labeling.
We believe this review offers the perfect opportunity
to amend the Fair Trading Act to include clear
and forcible definitions of terms such
as vegetarian, um, and vegan.
Other countries have already taken steps towards this.
So the UK Food Standards Agency has issued formal guidance
defining vegan and vegetarian labeling to protect consumers.
Uh, the European Union has worked toward harmonizing the
definitions to prevent misleading claims,
and its India goes even further legally defining vegetarian
and non-vegetarian food and its food safety
and standards regulations with clear
symbols required on packaging.
So these ex examples show that it can be done
and the clear enforceable standards benefit both,
uh, consumers and businesses.
The Museum Vegetarian Society does operate the vegetarian
approved and vegan certified certification programs.
These programs demonstrate
that clear standards can work successfully in the
marketplace, but voluntary certification alone can't replace
consistent national definitions.
So we're not asking for complex
or costly reform only for clarity and fairness.
Consumers deserve to know what's in their
products and the products they're buying.
And ethical producers deserve a level playing field where,
where misleading claims are not tolerated.
With vegetarian vegetarianism
and veganism becoming increasingly mainstream,
the time has come to update the laws
to reflect the choices New Zealanders make about
what they buy and consume.
Excuse me. Ina, ina, can I just interrupt you?
And I apologize for, for interrupting you,
but I do have a limited period of time
and I've got a couple of questions from
lovely people beside me.
Would you like to feel those
or would you like to continue, um,
sharing your thoughts? Yeah,
I've just go just a little bit more and I'm done.
So literally like Cool. Cool.
Thank, thank you so much. Thank you. No worries.
So just in closing, um, on behalf
of the New Zealand Vision Society, as the government
to amend the Fair Trading Act
to include clear enforceable definitions
to terms like vegetarian, vegan,
and plant-based, ensuring these words can only be used when
products meet consistent criteria
and then work with relevant agencies including the Comic
Commerce Commission, food standards, Australian New Zealand,
to ensure these definitions are implemented and enforced.
Um, and this would, you know, provide consumers, um,
to protect them, reward integrity in business,
and build trust in labels we can rely on.
And that's, thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Uh, Joe has a question
and then I have a very quick question
From Steve. It's, it's probably
more of a statement than a question,
I think because we, the, whether people are vegetarian
or vegan or choose, um, uh,
or don't, um, believe in that, uh, vegan in, in eating
and being vegan, it's really also a health issue, right?
Isn't it? Because if there's,
because if you, if you like, look,
I've got allergic to eggs.
Yeah. Uh, yeah, that's right. I've got, um,
a daughter-in-law and grandchildren who are vegan, right?
So I just go after the supermarket
and I think, oh, I'll just buy that.
'cause it says vegan. That's, you know, they can have
that when they come, come around to visit.
But actually in truth, it may not be.
And so I don't take my glasses to the supermarket
and read everything on the back label.
So this is just basically, it's just simply clarity
and a health issue really, isn't it too,
'cause of allergies that, that people
may have, isn't it? Yeah,
Exactly. It is
just providing clarity
because we don't have a legal definition just providing the
definition and,
and where it's enforced, where, you know,
people can just say anything on a label and they can just,
Yeah. And it's
Easy. Rely on
what's on their label without having to read
through the ingredients list.
It's an allergy. Yeah. An uh, an allergy problem.
But also, you know, people for religious reasons.
I have friends, you know, for religious reasons who need
to check very clearly what's in products
because of this exact reason, you know?
Mm-hmm. So, yeah.
Thanks Ena. I've got one quick question from Steve Abel,
and then sadly we've met Tom.
Yeah. Uh, Claire suggested from the vegan society
that she would be comfortable with us using the definition
that the United Kingdom uses of vegan and vegetarian.
Do you feel similarly to that?
And you mentioned the Fair Trading Act,
but it surely also needs to go on food safety legislation
because of the percentage of people
who are avoiding those sub those products for health
or for safety reasons, food safety reasons.
Would you agree or
Religious? Yes, a hundred
percent agree.
Um, it should go into the food sta uh, safety standards.
Um, it's just, you know, obviously with the review
of the Fair Trading Act coming up and,
and the Fair Training Act being used a lot to deal
with situations like this, it'd be amazing
to also put the definitions in there, um,
to cover kind of all bases.
Um, but yeah, so I, we would be comfortable, um,
using the definitions, uh, that are being, you know,
implemented in the uk.
We actually, with the vegetarian approved
trademark, we already do that.
So it's already what's implemented in the, uh,
vegetarian society in the UK is already implemented in
New Zealand from the vegetarian society
that we already Yeah.
Implement when and when businesses are getting certified,
when they're certifying products in
Final, very, very quickly.
Steve, in a sense,
and I took this from Claire's submission as well,
'cause there's these, um, independent certification things
that your societies have set up.
If there was a legal definition that was, uh, established,
it would actually be lower cost for food, uh, manufacturers
and producers because they wouldn't have to go
through another certification process, would they?
They'd be able to meet the legal definition.
Exactly. So it would be just already implemented,
you know, in New Zealand, people would be aware exactly
what the definition definitions are.
Yeah. And so then you would take away this guessing game of,
you know, companies having to be like, okay, is this,
for them to make that decision.
The decision would already be made
because there's already standards set up.
Brilliant. Thank you. Thank you,
ENA, thank you so much for your time.
Very grateful for your time this morning.
Um, thank you much. We'll leave you to your day.
Thank you so much for your submission. Thank
You. Very
grateful. Thank you so much.